USubscription v4 API re-write (#326)
eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec: up-l3/usubscription/v4/README.adoc

| `*SUBSCRIBE_PENDING*`
| Subscription is pending, awaiting acknowledgement from the remote uSubscription service
| 1st Subscriber uEntity has called `Subscribe(topic)` to a remote topic
| Send a subscription request to the destination device uSubscription service
| Received a (positive) response from the destination device uSubscription service

| `*UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING*`
| Unsubscribe is pending, awaiting acknowledgement from the remote uSubscription service
| Last subscriber called `Unsubscribe(topic)` on a xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] `SUBSCRIBED` remote topic`
| Send an unsubscribe request to the destination device uSubscription service
| Received a (positive) response from the destination device uSubscription service
|===

NOTE: The _Action_ column in the above table describes the action to be taken by a uSubscription service instance when a specific state transition occurs. 

== Subscription Change Notifications

When any of a client/topic relationship's _subscription status_, _expiration time_ or _sample period_ changes, uSubscription service notifies the clients affected by the change. There are three ways such change messages are distributed:

> 1. Every subscription holder is automatically sent susbcription change messages by the uSubscription service it subscribed with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Every subscription holder is automatically sent subscription change messages by the uSubscription service it subscribed with.
```

Author: my favorite typo

= uSubscription
:toc: preamble
:sectnums:
:communication_layer_api_ref: xref:../../../up-l2/api.adoc[Communication Layer API] 
:basic_types_ref: xref:../../../basics/README.adoc[uProtocol Basic Types]
:uuri_ref: xref:../../../basics/uri.adoc[UURI]
:uuri_matching_ref: xref:../../../basics/uri.adoc#pattern-matching[UURI pattern matching]

> :ucode_proto_ref: xref:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[UCode]

Reviewer: this does not work, because the target file is not asciidoc but a proto file. `xref` can only be used to refer to content in an asciidoc file ...

```suggestion
:ucode_proto_ref: link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[UCode]
```

Author: ok, learned something new again

A distributed publish-subscribe network requires the following capabilities to be useful:
 
- xref:../../../basics/uri.adoc[unified addressing] scheme
- xref:../../../up-l2/dispatchers/README.adoc[message forwarding] between different pub-sub domains
- xref:../../udiscovery/v3/README.adoc[discoverability] of available publishers/topics
- tracking of subscriptions, especially to/from remote systems (this specification)
- option for xref:../../utwin/v2/README.adoc[local caching and temporally decoupled access] to published data

The remainder of this document defines the use cases, interfaces, state machines and application flows to support tracking of subscriptions, including between remote/distributed systems.

---

The uSubscription service API is defined using UML2 notation.

.uSubscription API
[#usubscription-api]
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
classDiagram
class USubscription {
    <<interface>>

>     subscribe(topic: UUri, expiration: Instant[0..1], sample_period: UInt32 [0..1]) : (UUri, SubscriptionStatus)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    subscribe(topic: UUri, expiration: Instant[0..1], samplePeriod: UInt32 [0..1]) : (UUri, SubscriptionStatus)
```

    unsubscribe(topic: UUri)
    fetchSubscriptions(topic_filter: UUri[0..1], subscriber_filter: UUri[0..1]) Subscription[*]
    registerForNotifications()
    unregisterForNotifications()

>     reset(reason: String[0..1])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    reset()
```

}

class SubscriptionStatus {
    <<enumeration>>
    UNSUBSCRIBED
    SUBSCRIBE_PENDING
    UNSUBSCRIBED
    UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING
}

class Subscription {
  topic: UUri
  subscriber: UUri
  status: SubscriptionStatus
  expiration: Instant[0..1]

>   sample_period: uint32[0..1]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  samplePeriod: UInt32[0..1]
```

* Calling this endpoint also registers the subscribing client to receive subscription change notifications when the subscription status changes.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-method_id~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
The uSubscription `Subscribe()` operation *MUST* use the method ID `1`.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-request-signature~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
The uSubscription `Subscribe()` operation *MUST* implement the following request message definitions:

---

.Subscribe Request Parameters
[%autowidth]
|===
| Parameter | Type | Mandatory | Description

| topic
| {uuri_ref}
| yes
a|
--
uProtocol URI of the topic to subscribe to.

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-subscribe-valid-topic-uuris~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
Calls to the uSubscription service `Subscribe()` operation *MUST* return a failure status message with {ucode_proto_ref} `INVALID_ARGUMENT` in case a `topic` UURI violates the xref:usubscription-topics[topic UURI rules].
--

| `expiration`
| Instant
| no
| Subscription xref:expiration-time[Expiration time]

> | `sample_period`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `samplePeriod`
```

| ubscriber unsubscribed
|
| `Subscribe(topic)` is called by a consumer

| `*SUBSCRIBED*`
| Subscriber uEntity is subscribed to the topic
| Subscription request has been processed and accepted
|
| Subscriber calls `Unsubscribe(topic)`

| `*SUBSCRIBE_PENDING*`
| Subscription is pending, awaiting acknowledgement from the remote uSubscription service
| 1st Subscriber uEntity has called `Subscribe(topic)` to a remote topic
| Send a subscription request to the destination device uSubscription service
| Received a (positive) response from the destination device uSubscription service

| `*UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING*`
| Unsubscribe is pending, awaiting acknowledgement from the remote uSubscription service
| Last subscriber called `Unsubscribe(topic)` on a xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] `SUBSCRIBED` remote topic`
| Send an unsubscribe request to the destination device uSubscription service
| Received a (positive) response from the destination device uSubscription service
|===

NOTE: The _Action_ column in the above table describes the action to be taken by a uSubscription service instance when a specific state transition occurs. 

== Subscription Change Notifications

> When any of a client/topic relationship's _subscription status_, _expiration time_ or _sample period_ changes, uSubscription service notifies the clients affected by the change - either because they are the subscription holders, or because they requested to be notified of changes involving a certain topic (or set of topics). In addition, uSubscription service publishes information about all subscription changes to a dedicated topic that can be subscribed to by any interested uEntity.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When any of a client/topic relationship's _subscription status_, _expiration time_ or _sample period_ changes, uSubscription service notifies the clients affected by the change - either because they are the subscription holders, or because they requested to be notified of changes involving a certain topic (or set of topics). In addition, uSubscription service publishes information about all subscription changes to a dedicated topic that can be subscribed to by authorized uEntities.
```

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-notification~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> uSubscription service *MUST* notify (send a UMessage of type `Notify` to) every susbcription holder on changes to subscription `status`, `expiration` time or `sample_period_ms` of their subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uSubscription service *MUST* send a UMessage of type `Notification` to each subscription holder on changes to subscription `status`, `expiration` time or `samplePeriod` of their subscription.
```

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-notification-resource~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> Subscription change Notification messages *MUST* use resource ID `0x8000` in the Notification source UURI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subscription change notifications *MUST* use resource ID `0x8000` in the message's source UURI.
```

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-message-type~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
Subscription change notifications *MUST* have a payload of type xref:subscription[`Subscription`].

[#subscription-change-message-topic]
=== Subscription change message topic

> When the `status`, `expiration` time or `sample_period_ms` of a subscription changes, uSubscription service publishes messages to a topic dedicated to such change information messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the `status`, `expiration` time or `samplePeriod` of a subscription changes, uSubscription service publishes messages to a topic dedicated to such change information messages.
```

For instance, a `uStreamer` application might subscribe to that topic to stay informed about any changes to remote subscriptions. Other use cases for such change messages might be subscription tracking for logging or billing purposes, etc.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-topic~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> uSubscription service *MUST* publish messages (send a UMessage of type `Publish`) about all changes to tracked subscriptions `status`, `expiration` time or `sample_period_ms` to a dedicated topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uSubscription service *MUST* publish messages (send a UMessage of type `Publish`) about all changes to tracked subscriptions `status`, `expiration` time or `samplePeriod` to a dedicated topic.
```

> uSubscription service *MUST* publish messages (send a UMessage of type `Publish`) about all changes to tracked subscriptions `status`, `expiration` time or `sample_period_ms` to a dedicated topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uSubscription service *MUST* send a UMessage of type `Publish` for each change to a tracked subscription's `status`, `expiration` time or `sample_period_ms` to a dedicated topic.
```

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-topic-resource~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
Subscription change messages *MUST* be published to a source UURI with the originating uSubscription service authority, uentity ID and version, using resource ID `0x8001`.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-topic-message-type~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> Subscription change notifications *MUST* have a payload of type xref:subscription[`Subscription`].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subscription change events *MUST* have a payload of type xref:subscription[`Subscription`].
```

=== Registering for subscription change notifications

> Any uEntity may register with uSubscription service to explicitly be sent subscription change Notifications when the `status`, `expiration` time or `sample_period_ms` of subscriptions tracked by uSubscription service changes. For instance, a `uStreamer` application might be interested in all subscription events that the `uStreamer` is bridging to, but using a transport to it's co-located uSubscription service that does not support pub/sub style communication. As the xref:subscription-change-message-topic[Subscription change message topic] is not available in this scenario, `uStreamer`` can use `RegisterForNotifications` to be sent Notification messages on each subscription change event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any uEntity may register with uSubscription service to explicitly be sent subscription change Notifications when the `status`, `expiration` time or `samplePeriod` of subscriptions tracked by uSubscription service changes. For instance, a `uStreamer` application might be interested in all subscription events that the `uStreamer` is bridging to, but using a transport to it's co-located uSubscription service that does not support pub/sub style communication. As the xref:subscription-change-message-topic[Subscription change message topic] is not available in this scenario, `uStreamer`` can use `RegisterForNotifications` to be sent Notification messages on each subscription change event.
```

[#register-for-notifications-operation]
==== RegisterForNotifications()

[source]
----
registerForNotifications()
----

uEntities use this operation to register for being sent subscription change Notification messages for any 
subscription tracked by uSubscription service.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-register-notifications-method_id~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
The uSubscription `RegisterForNotifications()` operation *MUST* use the method ID `4`.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-register-notifications-request-signature~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
The uSubscription `RegisterForNotifications()` operation *MUST* implement an empty request message.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-register-notifications-response-signature~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
The uSubscription `RegisterForNotifications()` operation *MUST* implement an empty response message.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-register-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> After a client has called `RegisterForNotifications()`, uSubscription service *MUST* send subscription change Notification messages to that client whenever subscription `status`, `expiration` time or `sample_period_ms` of any subscription tracked by uSubscription service changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a client has called `RegisterForNotifications()`, uSubscription service *MUST* send subscription change Notification messages to that client whenever subscription `status`, `expiration` time or `samplePeriod` of any subscription tracked by uSubscription service changes.
```

- option for xref:../../utwin/v2/README.adoc[local caching and temporally decoupled access] to published data

The remainder of this document defines the use cases, interfaces, state machines and application flows to support tracking of subscriptions, including between remote/distributed systems.

---

The uSubscription service API is defined using UML2 notation.

.USubscription API
[#usubscription-api]
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
classDiagram
class USubscription {
    <<interface>>
    subscribe(topic: UUri, expiry: UInt64 [0..1], sample_period: UInt32 [0..1]) : (UUri, SubscriptionStatus)
    unsubscribe(topic: UUri)
    fetchSubscriptions(topic_filter: UUri[0..1], subscriber_filter: UUri[0..1]) Subscription[*]
    registerForNotifications(topic: UUri)
    unregisterForNotifications(topic: UUri)
    reset(reason: String[0..1])
}

class SubscriptionStatus {
    <<enumeration>>
    UNSUBSCRIBED
    SUBSCRIBE_PENDING
    UNSUBSCRIBED
    UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING
}

class Subscription {
  topic: UUri
  subscriber: UUri
  status: SubscriptionStatus
  expire_ms: uint64[0..1]
  sample_period_ms: uint32[0..1]
}

USubscription ..> SubscriptionStatus

> Subscription ..> SubscriptionStatus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
USubscription ..> SubscriptionStatus
USubscription ..> Subscription
```

The `uSubscription` service component provides this bookkeeping capability.

For an illustration of remote subscribe/unsubscribe scenarios, refer to section xref:remote-subscription-sequences[Remote subscription sequences].

[#usubscription-publisher]
== Publisher

A _Publisher_ is a uEntity that sends messages to a _topic_, thus making the information available to other uEntities interested in the topic. Publishers typically use the {communication_layer_api_ref} for this purpose. 

A Publisher in a uProtocol network usually does not perform any additional actions beyond what is necessary to publish messages to the transport it is connected to.

[#usubscription-subscriber]
== Subscriber

A _Subscriber_ is a uEntity that is interested in a particular _topic_ and wants to receive messages that have been published to that topic by other uEntities. Subscribers typically use the {communication_layer_api_ref} for this purpose.

> [.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-valid-subscriber-uuris~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

Reviewer: IMHO we should have separate spec items per operation for defining invalid arguments. Having this generic spec item that can only be interpreted in conjunction with other potential spec items defined for operations, will make it very hard to implement them and evolve the spec, in case some of these constraints change over time.

Author: Going through the document, it turns out that we never pass a generic subscriber UURI as an explicit argument anyways - they are always part of the lower-level transport handling. 
The one call that deals with subscriber URIs (_filters) already defines explicit rules for those. 
Removing this section entirely.

Unless stated otherwise, uSubscription service *MUST* return a failure status message with {ucode_proto_ref} `INVALID_ARGUMENT` in case a subscriber UURI passed to the API

* is not a valid {uuri_ref} or
* contains a _wildcard_ `authority_name` or

> * contains a _wildcard_ _service ID_ (_least_ significant 16 bits of `ue_id`) or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* contains a _wildcard_ _service type ID_ (_least_ significant 16 bits of `ue_id`) or
```

* contains a _wildcard_ _service instance ID_ (most significant 16 bits of `ue_id`) or
* contains an _empty_ or _wildcard_ `ue_version_major` or
* contains a `resource_id` that is not `0`

[.specitem,oft-sid="aou~usubscription-interaction-subscriber~1",oft-tags="USubscription"]
In addition to performing the actions necessary to subscribe to and receive messages from the transport that they are using, Subscribers in a uProtocol network are *REQUIRED* to invoke the <<subscribe-operation>> and <<unsubscribe-operation>> operations of their local uSubscription service instance in order to indicate which topics they _subscribe_ to or _unsubscribe_ from.

[#subscribe-operation]
=== Subscribe()

[source]
----

> subscribe(topic: UUri, expiry: UInt64[0..1], sample_period: UInt32[0..1]) : (UUri, SubscriptionStatus)

Reviewer: how about using an _Instant_ type for specifying the expiration instead of UInt64? FMPOV that would it much easier to explain/use ...

Author: Good idea

----

Clients use this method to subscribe to a topic. 

> * Returns the status of the requested subscription. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Returns the current status of the requested subscription. 
```

* Calling this endpoint also registers the subscribing client to receive subscription change notifications when the subscription status changes.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-method_id~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

> The uSubscription `Subscribe()` function *MUST* use the method ID `1`.

Reviewer: is it _method_ or _function_ or _operation_? IMHO we should use one term consistently across the document.

Author: Fair point. Going with operation.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-request-signature~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
The uSubscription `Subscribe()` function *MUST* implement the following request message definitions:

---

.Subscribe Request Parameters
[%autowidth]
|===
| Parameter | Type | Mandatory | Description

| topic
| {uuri_ref}
| yes
a|
--
uProtocol URI of the topic to subscribe to.

> Also refer to xref:usubscription-topics[Topic UURIs] regarding specific restrictions on topic UURIs.

Reviewer: this should be turned into a spec item that defines the behavior of the service in case a non-topic UUri is being passed in.

Author: Done

--

| `expiry`
| UInt64
| no

> | Subscription xref:expiration-time[Expiration time]

Reviewer: what happens when I pass in a value that represents an instant in the past?

Author: Moved the corresponding requirements to here, they were (badly) placed in the generic expiry parameter chapter.

[%autowidth]
|===
| Type | Description

| {uuri_ref}
| Subscribed topic, as passed to SubscriptionRequest

| xref:SubscriptionStatus[SubscriptionStatus]
| Current status of the subscription.
|===

---

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function, uSubscription service *MUST* start tracking the client as a subscriber to the indicated topic.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-persistency~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function, uSubscription service *MUST* persistenly (across service restarts) store the client as a subscriber of the indicated topic.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-expiration~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
When the subscription expiration time is exceeded, uSubscription service *MUST* stop tracking the associated client-topic subscription, i.e. set xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] of the client-topic combination to `UNSUBSCRIBED`.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-no-expiration~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

> When a subscription request does not specify an expiration time, uSubscription service *MUST* track the associated client-topic subscription indefinitely and persistently (across service restarts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a subscription request does not specify an expiration time, uSubscription service *MUST* track the associated client-topic subscription until the subscription is canceled by the client.
```

IMHO we should turn the requirement regarding persistence across restarts into its own spec item.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-multiple~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

> When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function for a topic that it is already subscribed to, uSubscription service *MUST* return a response message containing the current xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] of this client-topic combination (e.g. `SUBSCRIBED` or `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function for a topic that it is already subscribed to, uSubscription service *MUST* return a response message containing the current xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] of this client/topic combination (e.g. `SUBSCRIBED` or `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`).
```

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-expiration-extension-past~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function for a topic that it is already subscribed to where the `expire` field value differs from the current expiration time and lies in the past, uSubscription service *MUST* unregister the subscription and set xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] `UNSUBSCRIBED`.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-remote~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
When a client makes the first call to `Subscribe()` to a xref:local-remote-subscriptions[remote] topic, uSubscription service *MUST* establish a remote subscription to that topic by sending a `Subscribe()` request to the uSubscription service running on the host indicated by the remote topic _authority_. 

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-remote-pending~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

> When uSubscription service sends a `Subscribe()` request to a remote uSubscription service, uSubscription service *MUST* set the xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] for any client-topic combination involving the subscribed remote topic to `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a local uSubscription service sends a `Subscribe()` request to a remote uSubscription service, the local uSubscription service *MUST* set the xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] for any client/topic combination involving the subscribed remote topic to `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`.
```

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-remote-response~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

> When uSubscription service receives a reply to a remote `Subscribe()` request, uSubscription service *MUST* set the xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] for any client-topic combination involving the subscribed remote topic to match the subscription status response of the remote uSubscription service (e.g. `SUBSCRIBED` or `UNSUBSCRIBED`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a local uSubscription service receives a reply to a remote `Subscribe()` request, the local uSubscription service *MUST* set the xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] for any client/topic combination involving the subscribed remote topic to match the subscription status response of the remote uSubscription service (e.g. `SUBSCRIBED` or `UNSUBSCRIBED`).
```

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-unsubscribe-pending~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function for a remote topic with xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] `UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING`, uSubscription service *MUST* initiate the regular remote subscription process, i.e. send a subscription request to the remote uSubscription service and set xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] to `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

> After a client calls the `Subscribe()` function, uSubscription service *MUST* send subscription change Notifications to that client whenever there are any changes to the state of the subscribed topic.

Reviewer: What events will cause such a notification being sent to the client? What information will be conveyed to the client?
Is this about getting notified when the publisher does no longer publish to the topic?

Author: tbd in updated revision (below)

= uSubscription
:toc: preamble
:sectnums:
:communication_layer_api_ref: xref:../../../up-l2/api.adoc[Communication Layer API] 
:basic_types_ref: xref:../../../basics/README.adoc[uProtocol Basic Types]
:uuri_ref: xref:../../../basics/uri.adoc[UURI]

> :umessage_ref: link:../../../basics/umessage.adoc[UMessage]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:umessage_ref: xref:../../../basics/umessage.adoc[UMessage]
```

Author: fixed, and also removed an unused ref

 
- xref:../../../basics/uri.adoc[unified addressing] scheme
- xref:../../../up-l2/dispatchers/README.adoc[message forwarding] between different pub-sub domains
- xref:../../udiscovery/v3/README.adoc[discoverability] of available publishers/topics
- tracking of subscriptions, especially to/from remote systems (this specification)
- option for xref:../../utwin/v2/README.adoc[local caching and temporally decoupled access] to published data

The remainder of this document defines the use cases, interfaces, state machines and application flows to support tracking of subscriptions, including between remote/distributed systems.

---

The uSubscription service API is defined using UML2 notation.

.uSubscription API
[#usubscription-api]
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
classDiagram
class USubscription {
    <<interface>>
    subscribe(topic: UUri, expiration: Instant[0..1], sample_period: UInt32 [0..1]) : (UUri, SubscriptionStatus)
    unsubscribe(topic: UUri)
    fetchSubscriptions(topic_filter: UUri[0..1], subscriber_filter: UUri[0..1]) Subscription[*]
    registerForNotifications()
    unregisterForNotifications()

>     reset(reason: String[0..1])

Reviewer: if the reason is important for reference/audit, then it should be mandatory. If it is not needed, then FMPOV we should omit the parameter altogether and let the client decide, whether it wants to log the reason or not.

Author: agreed

}

class SubscriptionStatus {
    <<enumeration>>
    UNSUBSCRIBED
    SUBSCRIBE_PENDING
    UNSUBSCRIBED
    UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING
}

class Subscription {
  topic: UUri
  subscriber: UUri
  status: SubscriptionStatus

>   expire_ms: Instant[0..1]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  expiration: Instant[0..1]
```

Author: good catch

  sample_period_ms: uint32[0..1]
}

USubscription ..> SubscriptionStatus
USubscription ..> Subscription
----

---
NOTE: The data types used in the following sections are defined in {basic_types_ref}. 
---

There are different types of messages passed between uEntities (_Request_/_Response_, _Publish_, _Notify_); this is how they are represented in the sequence diagrams in this document:

[discrete]
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram
    participant A as uEntity A
    participant B as uEntity B

    rect rgb(245, 245, 245)
    A->>+B: Request
    B-->>-A: Response
    end
    rect rgb(230, 230, 230)
    A--)B: Notify
    end
    rect rgb(215, 215, 215)
    A-)B: Publish
    end
----

> ---

Reviewer: FMPOV this should be removed because it will confuse readers who are familiar with UML2 sequence diagram semantics

Author: ok

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-remote~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
When a client makes the first call to `Subscribe()` to a xref:local-remote-subscriptions[remote] topic, uSubscription service *MUST* establish a remote subscription to that topic by sending a `Subscribe()` request to the uSubscription service running on the host indicated by the remote topic _authority_. 

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-remote-pending~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
When a local uSubscription service sends a `Subscribe()` request to a remote uSubscription service, the local uSubscription service *MUST* set the xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] for any client/topic combination involving the subscribed remote topic to `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-remote-response~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> When a local uSubscription service receives a reply to a remote `Subscribe()` request, the local uSubscription service *MUST* set the xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] for any client/topic combination involving the subscribed remote topic to match the subscription status response of the remote uSubscription service (e.g. `SUBSCRIBED` or `UNSUBSCRIBED`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a local uSubscription service receives a reply to a remote `Subscribe()` request, the local uSubscription service *MUST* set the xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] for any client/topic combination involving the subscribed remote topic to the status returned by the remote uSubscription service (e.g. `SUBSCRIBED` or `UNSUBSCRIBED`).
```

Author: done

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-unsubscribe-pending~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` operation for a remote topic with xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] `UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING`, uSubscription service *MUST* initiate the regular remote subscription process, i.e. send a subscription request to the remote uSubscription service and set xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] to `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> After a client calls the `Subscribe()` operation, uSubscription service *MUST* send subscription change Notifications to that client whenever there are any changes to the state of the subscribed topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a client calls the `Subscribe()` operation, uSubscription service *MUST* send a subscription change notification to that client whenever the subscription status of the topic is changed.
```

Author: done

---

[discrete]
==== Subscribe operation
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram

> actor C as Client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actor C as Subscriber
```

Author: done

participant T as uSubscription Service

C->>T : subscribe("//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10")
activate T
    T-->>C : ("//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10", SubscriptionStatus.SUBSCRIBED)
deactivate T
----

---

[discrete]
==== Subscribe operation with expiration time
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram

actor C as Client [/80/2]
participant T as uSubscription Service
participant N as Notification Channel

C->>T : subscribe("//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10", 1780923819000)
activate T
    T-->>C : ("//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10", SubscriptionStatus.SUBSCRIBED)
    T-->T : await expiration
    T->>C : ("//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10", "/80/2", SubscriptionStatus.UNSUBSCRIBED)
    T--)N : ("//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10", "/80/2", SubscriptionStatus.UNSUBSCRIBED)

> deactivate T

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actor C as Subscriber [/80/2]
participant T as uSubscription Service
participant N as Notification Channel

C->>T : subscribe("//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10", 2026-06-15T23:25:00)
activate T
    T-->>C : ("//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10", SubscriptionStatus.SUBSCRIBED)
deactivate T
T-->T : await expiration
T->>C : ("//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10", "/80/2", ubscriptionStatus.UNSUBSCRIBED)
```

Author: done

----

---

[#unsubscribe-operation]
=== Unsubscribe()

[source]
----
unsubscribe(topic: UUri)
----

Clients use this operation to unsubscribe from a topic. 

* Unsubscribing from a topic always succeeds from the client's point of view.

> * Calling this endpoint unregisters the client from receive subscription change notifications for future subscription state changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Calling this endpoint also unregisters the client from receiving any future change notifications regarding the subscription.
```

When a client calls the `Unsubscribe()` operation for a remote topic with xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`, uSubscription service *MUST* initiate the regular remote unsubscribe process, i.e. send an unsubscribe request to the remote uSubscription service and set xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] to `UNSUBSCRIBED`.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-unsubscribe-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
After a client calls the `Unsubscribe()` operation, uSubscription service *MUST* stop sending subscription change Notifications to that client whenever there are any changes to the state of the subscription.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-remote-unsubscribe-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
When the last client subscribed to a remote topic calls the `Unsubscribe()` operation on that topic, uSubscription service *MUST* stop publishing subscription change messages for that topic to the `subscriptionChange` channel.

---

[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram

actor C as Client [/80/2]
participant T as uSubscription Service

> C->>T : unsubscribe("//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10")
> activate T
>     T-->>C : ()
> deactivate T

Reviewer: ```suggestion
C->>T : unsubscribe("//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10")
activate T
    T-->>C
deactivate T
```

Author: done

----

---

[#fetch-subscriptions-operation]
=== FetchSubscriptions()

[source]
----
fetchSubscriptions(topic_filter: UUri[0..1], subscriber_filter: UUri[0..1]) : Subscription[*]
----

> Clients use this operation to fetch subscription information as tracked by uSubscription service, returned as a list of xref:subscription[Subscriptions].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients use this operation to get details about subscriptions that are currently tracked by uSubscription service.
```

Author: ok

> Clients can provide {uuri_ref}s to filter this list by topic and/or subscriber. Filter UURIs may contain wildcards. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients can provide {uuri_ref}s to filter subscriptions by topic and/or subscriber. Filter UURIs may contain wildcards. 
```

Author: ok

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-method_id~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
The uSubscription `FetchSubscriptions()` operation *MUST* use the method ID `3`.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-request-signature~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
The uSubscription `FetchSubscriptions()` operation *MUST* implement the following request message definitions:

---

.Fetch Subscriptions Request Parameters
[%autowidth]
|===
| Parameter | Type | Mandatory | Description

| topic_filter
| {uuri_ref}

> | yes

Reviewer: based on the language used in the spec items, this seems to be an _optional_ parameter, right?

Author: true

a|
--
[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-topic-filter~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
If a topic filter {uuri_ref} is provided as part of a call to `FetchSubcriptions()`, uSubscription service *MUST* only return xref:subscription[Subscription] entries where the subscribed topic is equal to the topic filter UURI.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-topic-filter-wildcards~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> The uSubscription service `FetchSubscriptions()` operation *MUST* be able to deal with wildcards in topic filter URIs, and only return subscription information for topics that are matched by the wildcarded filter URI.

Reviewer: IMHO this should be collapsed into a single spec item because a _specific_ UUri is just a special type of _pattern_ UUri that needs to be matched against. We should also refer to the corresponding Pattern Matching section in the UUri spec here  FMPOV

Author: done

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-invalid-topic-filter~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
The uSubscription service `FetchSubscriptions()` operation *MUST* return a failure status message with {ucode_proto_ref} `INVALID_ARGUMENT` in case a topic filter UURI is not a valid {uuri_ref}.
--

| subscriber_filter
| {uuri_ref}
| yes
a|
--
[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-subscriber-filter~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
If a subscriber filter {uuri_ref} is provided as part of a call to `FetchSubcriptions()`, uSubscription service *MUST* only return xref:subscription[Subscription] entries where the subscribing client is equal to the subscriber filter UURI.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-subscriber-filter-wildcards~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> The uSubscription service `FetchSubscriptions()` operation *MUST* be able to deal with wildcards in subscriber filter URIs, and only return subscription information for subscribers that are matched by the wildcarded filter URI.

Reviewer: same as for the topic filter

Author: done

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-invalid-subscriber-filter~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
The uSubscription service `FetchSubscriptions()` operation *MUST* return a failure status message with {ucode_proto_ref} `INVALID_ARGUMENT` in case a subscriber filter UURI is not a valid {uuri_ref}.
--
|===

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-response-signature~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
The uSubscription `FetchSubscriptions()` operation *MUST* implement the following response message definitions:

.Fetch Subscriptions Response Parameters
[%autowidth]
|===
| Type | Description

| xref:subscription[Subscriptions]
| List of currently tracked subscriptions, filtered by topic_filter and subscriber_filter as applicable.
|===

---

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> When a client calls the `FetchSubscribers()` operation, uSubscription service *MUST* return a list of xref:subscription[subscription] information, as currently tracked by the service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a client calls the `FetchSubscribers()` operation, uSubscription service *MUST* return a (possibly empty) list of xref:subscription[subscription] information, as currently tracked by the service.
```

---

[discrete]
==== FetchSubscription operation
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram

actor C as Client [/80/2]
participant T as uSubscription Service
Note right of T: Clients [/80/2] and [/90/1] subscribed<br/> to topic [//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10]

C->>T : fetchSubscriptions()
activate T

>     T-->>C : Subscriptions[2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    T-->>C : Subscription[2]
```

    Note right of T: All available SubscriptionInfo
deactivate T
----

---

[discrete]
==== FetchSubscription operation with subscriber filter
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram

actor C as Client [/80/2]
participant T as uSubscription Service
Note right of T: Clients [/80/2] and [/90/1] subscribed<br/> to topic [//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10]

C->>T : fetchSubscriptions(subscriberFilter: "/80/2")
activate T

>     T-->>C : Subscriptions[1]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    T-->>C : Subscription[1]
```

    Note right of T: all SubscriptionInfo relating to subscriber [/80/2]
deactivate T
----

---

[discrete]
==== FetchSubscription operation with wildcard topic filter
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram

actor C as Client [/80/2]
participant T as uSubscription Service
Note right of T: Client [/80/2] subscribed to topics<br/>[//vehicle/A1B/1/9A10] and [//vehicle/B2C/2/0B21],<br/>client [/90/1]subscribed to topic [//vehicle/A1B/1/9A11]

C->>T : fetchSubscriptions(topicFilter: "//vehicle/A1B/FF/FFFF")
activate T

>     T-->>C : Subscriptions[2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    T-->>C : Subscription[2]
```

    Note right of T: all SubscriptionInfo relating to topics from service //vehicle/A1B/
deactivate T
----

---

[#usubscription-topics]
== Topics

> A topic identifies the message resource that a link:#usubscription-subscriber[Subscriber] wants to subscribe to. Topic are expressed in {uuri_ref} format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A topic identifies the message resource that a <<usubscription-subscriber>> wants to subscribe to. Topic are expressed in {uuri_ref} format.
```

> Topic UURIs passed to uSusbcription operations must

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Topic UURIs passed to uSubscription operations must
```

* be a valid {uuri_ref} and
* contain a `resource_id` that is within range `[0x8000, 0xFFFE]` and
* not contain an _empty_ or _wildcard_ `authority_name` and
* not contain a _wildcard_ _service ID_ (_least_ significant 16 bits of `ue_id`) and
* not contain a _wildcard_ `resource_id`.

It is permissible for topic UURIs to contain wildcard _service instance ID_ (_most_ significant 16 bits of `ue_id`). For example, imagine the case where a client wants to "subscribe to the _door open_ event, from any instance of _door_ in the vehicle".

[#usubscription-states]
== Subscription States

A subscription state defines the relationship between exactly one subscriber and one topic. In this section we elaborate on the states that a this relationship can take, based on uSubscription service API calls from uEntities. 

> The following diagram illustrates the subscriber-topic states, and the transitions between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A _Subscription State_ defines the relationship between exactly one subscriber and one topic. The following diagram illustrates the possible states a subscription can be in and the transitions between the states, triggered by calls to the uSubscription service API.
```

---

.Subscription State Machine
[#usubscription-state-machine]
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
stateDiagram-v2
    state sub_local <<choice>>
    state unsub_local <<choice>>

    [*] --> sub_local: Subscribe(topic)

    UNSUBSCRIBED --> sub_local: Subscribe(topic)
    sub_local --> SUBSCRIBED: is local topic
    sub_local --> SUBSCRIBE_PENDING: is remote topic
    SUBSCRIBE_PENDING --> SUBSCRIBED: remote Subscribe(topic)
    note left of SUBSCRIBE_PENDING
        On first subscription request to remote topic only,
        as long as remote subscription request has not 
        received positive confirmation.
    end note
    
    SUBSCRIBED --> unsub_local: Unsubscribe(topic)
    unsub_local --> UNSUBSCRIBED: is local topic
    unsub_local --> UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING: is remote topic
    UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING --> UNSUBSCRIBED: remote Unsubscribe(topic)
    note right of UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING
        On first unsubscribe request to remote topic only,
        as long as remote unsubscribe request has not 
        received positive confirmation.
    end note
----

---

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-state-machine~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> uSubscription service *MUST* implement subscription state transisitions of client-topic subscription relationships according to the xref:usubscription-state-machine[above state diagram].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uSubscription service *MUST* implement subscription state transisitions of client-topic subscription relationships according to the <<usubscription-state-machine>>.
```

.Subscription State Details
[%autowidth,options="header",]
|===
| State | Description | Entry | Action | Exit

| `*UNSUBSCRIBED*`
| Subscriber uEntity is not subscribed to the topic
| ubscriber unsubscribed
|
| `Subscribe(topic)` is called by a consumer

| `*SUBSCRIBED*`
| Subscriber uEntity is subscribed to the topic
| Subscription request has been processed and accepted
|
| Subscriber calls `Unsubscribe(topic)`

| `*SUBSCRIBE_PENDING*`
| Subscription is pending, awaiting acknowledgement from the remote uSubscription service
| 1st Subscriber uEntity has called `Subscribe(topic)` to a remote topic
| Send a subscription request to the destination device uSubscription service
| Received a (positive) response from the destination device uSubscription service

| `*UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING*`
| Unsubscribe is pending, awaiting acknowledgement from the remote uSubscription service
| Last subscriber called `Unsubscribe(topic)` on a xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] `SUBSCRIBED` remote topic`
| Send an unsubscribe request to the destination device uSubscription service
| Received a (positive) response from the destination device uSubscription service
|===

> NOTE: The Action column in the above table describes that action to be taken by a uSubscription service instance to effect a specific state transition. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: The _Action_ column in the above table describes the action to be taken by a uSubscription service instance when a specific state transition occurs. 
```

== Subscription Change Notifications

> When subscription `status`, `expiration` time or `sample_period_ms` of a client-topic relationship changes, uSubscription service notifies the clients affected by the change - either because they are the subscription holders, or because they requested to be notified of changes involving a certain topic (or set of topics). In addition, uSubscription service publishes information about all subscription changes to a dedicated topic that can be listened to by any interested uEntity.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When any of a client/topic relationship's _subscription status_, _expiration time_ or _sample period_ changes, uSubscription service notifies the clients affected by the change - either because they are the subscription holders, or because they requested to be notified of changes involving a certain topic (or set of topics). In addition, uSubscription service publishes information about all subscription changes to a dedicated topic that can be subscribed to by any interested uEntity.  
```

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-notification~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
uSubscription service *MUST* notify (send a UMessage of type `Notify` to) every susbcription holder on changes to subscription `status`, `expiration` time or `sample_period_ms` of their subscription.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-notification-resource~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
Subscription change Notification messages *MUST* use resource ID `0x8000` in the Notification source UURI.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-message-type~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> Subscription change notifications *MUST* be messages of type xref:subscription[`Subscription`].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subscription change notifications *MUST* have a payload of type xref:subscription[`Subscription`].
```

=== Subscription change message topic

When the `status`, `expiration` time or `sample_period_ms` of a subscription changes, uSubscription service publishes messages to a topic dedicated to such change information messages.
For instance, a `uStreamer` application might subscribe to that topic to stay informed about any changes to remote subscriptions. Other use cases for such change messages might be subscription tracking for logging or billing purposes, etc.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-topic~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
uSubscription service *MUST* publish messages (send a UMessage of type `Publish`) about all changes to tracked subscriptions `status`, `expiration` time or `sample_period_ms` to a dedicated topic.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-topic-resource~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]
Subscription change messages *MUST* be published to a source UURI with the originating uSubscription service authority, uentity ID and version, using resource ID `0x8001`.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-change-topic-message-type~1",oft-needs="dsn,impl,utest",oft-tags="uSubscription"]

> Subscription change publish messages *MUST* be of type xref:subscription[`Subscription`].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subscription change publish messages *MUST* have a payload of type xref:subscription[`Subscription`].
```

classDiagram
class USubscription {
    <<interface>>

>     subscribe(topic: UUri, expiry: Instant[0..1], sample_period: UInt32 [0..1]) : (UUri, SubscriptionStatus)

Reviewer: use `expiration` as param name?

  topic: UUri
  subscriber: UUri
  status: SubscriptionStatus

>   expire_ms: Instant[0..1]

Reviewer: `expiration`?

[source]
----

> subscribe(topic: UUri, expiry: Instant[0..1], sample_period: UInt32[0..1]) : (UUri, SubscriptionStatus)

Reviewer: `expiration`?

--
uProtocol URI of the topic to subscribe to.

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-subscribe-valid-topic-uuris~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
Calls to the uSubscription service `Subscribe()` operation *MUST* return a failure status message with {ucode_proto_ref} `INVALID_ARGUMENT` in case a `topic` UURI violates the xref:usubscription-topics[topic UURI rules].
--

| `expiry`

> | Instant

Reviewer: `expiration`?

---

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` operation, uSubscription service *MUST* start tracking the client as a subscriber to the indicated topic.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-persistency~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` operation, uSubscription service *MUST* persistenly (across service restarts) store the client as a subscriber of the indicated topic.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-multiple~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` operation for a topic that it is already subscribed to, uSubscription service *MUST* return a response message containing the current xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] of this client/topic combination (e.g. `SUBSCRIBED` or `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`).

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-no-expiration~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

> When a subscription request does not specify an `expiry` time, uSubscription service *MUST* track the associated client-topic subscription until the subscription is canceled by the client.

Reviewer: `expiration`?

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-expiration~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

> When a subscriptions `expiry` time is exceeded, uSubscription service *MUST* stop tracking the associated client-topic subscription, i.e. set xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] of the client-topic combination to `UNSUBSCRIBED`.

Reviewer: `expiration`?

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-past-subscription-expiry~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

> If `expiry` time is set in the past when the associated subscription request is processed by uSubscription service, it *MUST NOT* register the subscription and return xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] `UNSUBSCRIBED`.

Reviewer: `expiration`?

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-expiration-extension~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

> When a client calls the `Subscribe()` operation for a topic that it is already subscribed to where the `expiry` field value differs from the current expiration time, uSubscription service *MUST* update the `expiry` field of the subscription with the new value.

Reviewer: `expiration`?

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-expiration-extension-past~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]

> When a client calls the `Subscribe()` operation for a topic that it is already subscribed to where the `expiry` field value differs from the current expiration time and lies in the past, uSubscription service *MUST* unregister the subscription and set xref:subscription-status[SubscriptionStatus] `UNSUBSCRIBED`.

Reviewer: `expiration`?

The Unix time 0 is exactly midnight UTC on 1 January 1970, with Unix time incrementing by 1 for every non-leap second after this. For example, 00:00:00 UTC on 1 January 1971 is represented in Unix time as 31536000. Negative values, on systems that support them, indicate times before the Unix epoch, with the value decreasing by 1 for every non-leap second before the epoch. For example, 00:00:00 UTC on 1 January 1969 is represented in Unix time as -31536000. 
____

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-subscription-expiry-datatype~1",oft-needs="impl,utest",oft-tags="USubscription"]
In message serialization, expiration time *MUST* be represented as a type that conforms to the definitions and expectations associated with a Unix timestamp.

---

NOTE: The specific data type to best represent a Unix timestamp is specific to the serialization technology that is being used. For instance, using protobuf, Expiration time would be best represented by the link:https://protobuf.dev/reference/protobuf/google.protobuf/#timestamp[well-known Timestamp type].

> 

Reviewer: FMPOV there is no need to use a UNIX timestamp here. Instead, we can simply refer to the [ISO 8601](https://www.iso8601.com/) definition for an instant in time.
The only thing that we need to define is the precision, i.e. whether expiration times should be specified with second or millisecond granularity. IMHO millisecond precision should do the trick for our use cases.

The question of how this is encoded in a service implementation, is something completely different FMPOV. The serialization format should make sure, though, that precision is not lost in transfer, but otherwise can freely be chosen, e.g. ISO8601 DateTime string encoding or Unix Epoch millis are both fine.

Author: Good suggestion - I didn't realize that there is ISO content that's publicly available like this.
